% --------------------------------------------------------------------

\chapter[Stellar and Binary Variables]{Stellar and Binary Variables}
\def\chpname{variables}\label{chp:\chpname}

Chapter editors:
\credit{AshishMahabal},
\credit{lmwalkowicz}.

% \noindent {\it
% Mike Lund, Ashish Mahabal, Stephen Ridgway,
% Lucianne Walkowicz, Rahul Biswas, Michelle Lochner,
% Jeonghee Rho, Eric Bellm...
% }

% --------------------------------------------------------------------


\section{Introduction}

The observation of variable targets investigates the time domain, and
thus realizes the essence of a synoptic survey.  Variable and
transient studies are all about sampling, and different types and time
scales of phenomena benefit from different sampling strategies -
sometimes significantly different.  Competing objectives described in
this chapter are at the heart of LSST observing strategy and cadence
design.

Target types are here grouped in subsections by variability
characteristics, but as will be seen, this does not mean that all
targets in a group require a common cadence, since the times scales
may vary dramatically.  Acquiring suitable data for a wide range of
time scales presents a fundamental problem for LSST, since the
available $~$800 visits to a field over the survey cannot be deployed
so as to usefully sample all time scales at all times.  This fact
leads to the concept of a non-uniform survey, in which parts of the
sky are visited more frequently part of the time.  The merits of such
options must be traded against the benefits of a more uniform survey
strategy.

When evaluating a particular observation or series of observations in
light of how they perform for a specific science case, it may be
helpful to think of metrics as lying along a continuum between
discovery and characterization. Discovery requires a minimum amount of
information to recognize an event or object as a candidate of
interest, which necessarily involves some level of bare-bones
characterization (upon which said recognition is based); rich
characterization, on the other hand, implies that an event may not
only be recognized as a candidate of interest, but basic properties of
the event or object may be determined from the observation (e.g.
including but not limited to classification of the event). The
interpretation of a given metric along this continuum has implications
for the subsequent action and analysis required, particularly as
regards possible follow-up observations with other facilities.


% --------------------------------------------------------------------

\input{periodicvariablestars.tex}

% --------------------------------------------------------------------

\input{nonperiodicvariablestars.tex}

% --------------------------------------------------------------------
